\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename loko.info
@settitle The Loko Scheme Developer's Manual
@c %**end of header
@include version.texi

@c @tex
@c \global\urefurlonlylinktrue
@c @end tex

@setchapternewpage odd

@syncodeindex fn cp

@copying
This manual is for Loko Scheme @value{VERSION}, an
optimizing R6RS Scheme compiler.

Copyright @copyright{} 2019 G@"oran Weinholt

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end quotation
@end copying

@c Same category SLIB uses
@dircategory The Algorithmic Language Scheme
@direntry
* Loko Manual: (loko).          The Loko Scheme Developer's Manual
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title The Loko Scheme Developer's Manual
@author G@"oran Weinholt

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top, Preface, (dir), (dir)
@top Loko Scheme

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Preface::
* Introduction::
* Using Loko::                      How Loko comes into being.
@c * Sample programs::
* Library reference::               The emptiness inside of Loko.
* Repair instructions::             How to react when Loko disintegrates.
@c * FAQ::                             Frequently Asked Questions, nothing else.
* Other resources::                 When nothing in this manual helped.
@c TODO: Also include references to blog articles
* Loko internals::                  What makes Loko go around.

Appendices

* GNU Free Documentation License::  The license for this manual.

Indices

* Index::
@end menu

@contents

@include preface.texi
@include introduction.texi
@include usage.texi

@node Library reference
@chapter Library reference

@menu
* Standard libraries::          The @code{(rnrs)} and @code{(srfi :NNN)} libraries
* Base library::                The @code{(loko)} library.
* Fibers::                      Lightweight concurrency, @code{(loko system fibers)}.
* Unsafe procedures::           Ways out of the box with @code{(loko system unsafe)}.
* Target libraries::            Libraries that don't work everywhere.
@end menu

@include lib-std.texi
@include lib-base.texi
@include lib-fibers.texi
@include lib-unsafe.texi
@include lib-target.texi

@node Repair instructions
@chapter Repair instructions

@menu
* Tools support::               How to get the coconut open
@end menu

@include rep-tools.texi

@node Other resources
@chapter Other resources

@include resources.texi

@node Loko internals
@chapter Loko internals

@menu
* Concurrency::                 Multiple timelines come together
* Drivers::                     Interfacing with hardware, in theory
* Interrupt handling::          When your process takes a forced vacation
@end menu

@include int-concurrency.texi
@include int-drivers.texi
@include int-interrupts.texi

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl-1.3.texi

@include indices.texi

@bye
