@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Loko Scheme Developer's Manual.
@c Copyright © 2019 Göran Weinholt
@c See loko.texi for the license.

@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface

I've been writing Scheme code for some time now. While doing so I was
also working on Scheme implementations. This is the first one that
seems to have come out okay.

@i{Göran Weinholt, 2019}

@menu
* Purpose::
* Credits::
* Loko License::
@end menu


@node Purpose
@unnumberedsec Purpose, audience and scope

This manual has two major parts: usage and internals. The first part
is intended to let the developer start using Loko to write useful
software. The second part goes into details on how Loko works and why
things are the way they are.

Some knowledge of Scheme is assumed for the usage part. The reader who
has no prior knowledge of any Lisp dialect will initially find it
difficult to parse the language.

This is not a complete description of the Scheme language. The reader
who wants a more detailed description of Scheme may want to read
@url{https://www.scheme.com/tspl4/, The Scheme Programming Language}
(TSPL) by R.@: Kent Dybvig. The language described in that book is the
same language that you can use in Loko Scheme.

This manual is also not a replacement for comments and descriptions in
the code. Loko Scheme is not meant to be a closed box; you are
supposed to open it up and look at the parts. Maybe even fix some to
suit your situation. Loko Scheme needs its own source code to compile
your programs, so every installation should come with source code.


@node Credits
@unnumberedsec Credits

Many have brought ideas, techniques and instructions to fruition that
later went into making Loko Scheme. It would not be what it is without
their contributions to science.

The syntax-case implementation is from @emph{r6rs-libraries} by
Abdulaziz Ghuloum and R.@: Kent Dybvig, with bug fixes and
improvements from Llewellyn Pritchard.

The high-level optimizer @emph{cp0} is based on the chapter @emph{Fast
and Effective Procedure Integration} from @emph{Extending the Scope of
Syntactic Abstraction} by Oscar Waddell (Ph.D.@: thesis).

The low-level optimizer is based on concepts taught in a course given
by David Whalley in 2011.

The register allocator, except for the bugs, is from @emph{Register
Allocation via Graph Coloring} by Preston Briggs (Ph.D.@: thesis).

The letrec handling is from @emph{Fixing Letrec (reloaded)} by
Abdulaziz Ghuloum and R.@: Kent Dybvig.

The bignum algorithms are based on algorithms from @emph{BigNum Math}
by Tom St Denis.

The @code{list?} procedure uses Olin Shiver's version of Robert W.@:
Floyd's cycle-finding algorithm.

The @code{equal?} procedure is from the paper @emph{Efficient
Nondestructive Equality Checking for Trees and Graphs} by Michael D.@:
Adams and R.@: Kent Dybvig.

Some intricate parts of the records implementation are from the
reference implementation of SRFI-76 by Michael Sperber.

The list sorting code is from SLIB, was written Richard A.@: O'Keefe and
is based on Prolog code by David H.@: D.@: Warren.

The dynamic-wind code is from SLIB and was written by Aubrey Jaffer.

The division magic, and many other wonderful hacks, is from the
excellent book @emph{Hacker's Delight} by Henry S.@: Warren, Jr.@:,
with foreword by one Guy L.@: Steele, Jr.!

The fibers library is loosely based on @emph{Parallel Concurrent ML}
by John Reppy, Claudio V.@: Russo and Yingqi Xiao. The API is based on
Guile fibers by Andy Wingo and the implementation is closely related
to his blog post @emph{a new concurrent ml}.

Thanks also to Abdulaziz Ghuloum for @emph{An Incremental Approach to
Compiler Construction}, which helped me consolidate the Scheme
compiler experience I had already accumulated through experimentation.


@node Loko License
@unnumberedsec The Loko Scheme License
@cindex AGPL
@cindex license

Loko Scheme is copyrighted software. The default legal state of
software is that no rights are granted. However, Loko Scheme is
licensed under a free software license. This license grants many
permissions, but they are conditional on following the terms of the
license.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Loko Scheme as a whole, including the compiler, the runtime, the
drivers, etc.@:, is published under the terms of the GNU Affero General
Public License version 3 or later (AGPL-3.0-or-later). See the file
@file{COPYING} in the source code tree.

Any binaries produced by the compiler are also under this license.
This means that all binaries created by the Loko Scheme compiler must
use a compatible license due to the restrictions in AGPL-3.0-or-later.

If this is a problem for your use of Loko Scheme, then please see
issue #2 in the bug tracker.

@item
This manual is published under the GNU Free Documentation License
(@pxref{GNU Free Documentation License}).

@item
The files under the samples directory are published under the terms of
the MIT license. See the file @file{samples/LICENSE.txt} in the source
code tree.

@item
The files under the srfi directory are also published under the terms
of the MIT license. See the file @file{srfi/LICENSE.txt} in the source
code tree. This license is conventional for SRFI implementations.

@end itemize

Most files carry their license information in brief using an
SPDX-License-Identifier.


@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "loko.texi"
@c End:
