@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Loko Scheme Developer's Manual.
@c Copyright © 2019 Göran Weinholt
@c See loko.texi for the license.

@section Loko Scheme website

The @url{https://scheme.fail, Loko Scheme} website has official
release tarballs and an online copy of the manual.

@section Online communities

There are two chat channels available on IRC. They are on the IRC
network Freenode and they are @code{#scheme} and @code{#loko}. The
@code{#scheme} channel is for the whole Scheme community. You will
need an IRC client to join these channels, but Freenode also offers a
web-based client.

If you're more of a forum or mailing list user, then there aren't any
direct options like this yet. But we have Usenet, which has filled
this need even since before there was an Internet. The community-wide
Scheme group is called @samp{comp.lang.scheme}. It is accessible via
any Usenet provider, even free ones like
@url{http://www.eternal-september.org/, Eternal September}. It is also
accessible via one of the big search engine companies.

There is also a community-wide Scheme Wiki at
@url{http://community.schemewiki.org}.

In my opinion it would be better for the Scheme community if it was
not as fragmented as it is. For that reason there will not be any
Loko-specific mailing lists.

@section Issue tracker

There is an issue tracker for Loko Scheme at gitlab.com. The URL is
@url{https://gitlab.com/weinholt/loko/issues}. You can submit issues
via email by sending them to the @samp{bugs} alias at the Loko Scheme
website's domain.

@section Package repositories

There are repositories of packages online where you can find many
useful libraries that work with Loko:

@itemize
@item
@url{https://akkuscm.org/, Akku.scm} -- an R6RS/R7RS package manager.
Akku also translates R7RS libraries to R6RS to try and make them work
with R6RS implementations.

@item
@url{http://snow-fort.org/, Snow} -- an R7RS package manager. These
packages are also included in Akku's repository.

@end itemize
